---
title: "CDC - Guidelines"
draft: false
---
Infection Prevention Practices in Dental Settings

## Risks to Dental Health Care Personnel 
Although the transfference of  infectious agents is seldom in a dental setting, there still remains the potiental of both patients and dental health care personnel (DHCP) contracting a pernicious pathogen.

During a dental procedure, both patients and (DHCP) are at a risk of being exposed to a myraid of pathogens via contact with bodily secretions such as blood, saliva, respiratory secretions, and contaminated equipment.  
  Below are some of the common diseases both patients and DHCP can contract and recommended infection prevention procedures. This will prevent transmission of pathogens while keeping patients and DHCP safe and healthy. 

### Bloodborne pathogens
Bloodborne pathogens are infectious bacterium found in human blood that can potentially cause diseases in humans if exposed. These pathogens included but are not limited to hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). These pathogens are transmissible in health care settings via needlesticks and other sharps-related injuries and may expose both patient and DHCP to bloodborne pathogens to lifelong chronic infections. Some of these pathogens are often carried by people unaware of their infections. Thus, it is necessary to properly follow infection prevention procedures to prevent transmission of pathogens to one another.  

### How to protect against bloodborne pathogens?
There are two tiers of precautions that are recommended by the Center of Disease and Control (CDC) to protect workers and patients. These tiers include standard precautions and transmission-based precautions. When both of precautions are applied they maximize the saftey of both DCHP and the patients.

**Standard Precautions (SP)** - is the primary way to prevent transmission of infectious agents. It protects both DHCP and patients not only from pathogens in human blood but other bodily fluids and secretions that one may be exposed to during provision of a procedure. Some elements of standard precautions include:
   * Hand hygiene.
   * Using personal protective equipment.
   * Respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette.
   * Sharps safety, including engineering and work practice controls.
   * Safe injection practices.
   * Sterilization and disinfection of instruments and devices.
   * Cleaning and disinfecting environmental surfaces.

Standard Precautions, applies without limitation to urine, feces, nasal secretions, sputum, vomit, and other body fluids that may be potential sources of worker exposure to infectious agents. These precautions, apply to all patients even when they are not known or suspected to be infectious. They must be used in the care of all patients, relentlessly.

**Transmission-Based Precautions (TBP)** - is the second tier of infection prevention. It is always used in addition to standard precautions to interrupt the spread of certain pathogens. There are three categories of transmission-based precautions, these are:
   * Airborne: Is used for patients suspected or known to be infected with pathogens transmitted by the airborne route (e.g., tuberculosis, measles, chickenpox).
   * Droplet (larger than 5 microns): Is used for patients suspected or known to be infected with pathogens transmitted by respiratory droplets that are generated by a patient who is coughing, sneezinf, or talking.
   * Contact: Is used for patients with suspected or known infections that represent an increased risk for contact transmission. 
 
The three different types of transmission-based precautions are applied based on what isw known or suspected about a patient's infection. Sometimes more than one transmission category may apply.   

### Dental Health Care Personnel Safety

> To protect the DHCP from potenitally contracting pathogens from patients, infection control programs should address immunizations of DHCP, exposure prevention and postexposure management, medical condition management and work-related illness and restrictions as well as maintan all health records in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws. 

To ensure the safety of both DHCP and patient, all DHCP must comply with the written infection control policies recommended by the CDC as facility policies. During an occurance or possibility of exposure from DHCP to patient, facilities include specific policies regarding person of contact with patients when personnel have potentially transmissible conditions. 
